Hello everyone! I am presenting our paper “Embracing Embodied Social Cognition in AI: Moving Away from
Computational Theory of Mind.”
Social cognition enables us to understand and interact with others and ourselves; in the context of AI, this translates to the development of systems that can not only
process information but also understand and adapt to the social context of their interactions with humans.
The integration of social cognition into AI draws from seminal works. Newell’s “Bands of Cognition”
presents a multi-layered cognitive framework emphasizing that social cognition is complex
and formulated over time. Minsky’s “Society of Mind” and Brooks’ Subsumption Architecture suggest that
complex social understanding in AI could emerge from the collaboration of specialized agents or
through interaction-focused behaviors. These foundational theories collectively underline
the complexity of embedding social cognition
in AI.
The prevalent computational approach to incorporating social cognition in AI is based on the Theory of Mind (ToM). According to ToM,
an individual can make inferences about others’ mental states in a social situation by
observation and act accordingly. Over the years, various approaches have been developed to create
developed to create AI systems with artificial ToM.
However, ToM has limitations. It views the mind as isolated, inferring others’ states solely through observation and neglecting the dynamic,
interactive nature of social cognition. Crucially, it overlooks the importance of social physical embodiment in these processes.
We propose an alternative, focusing on embodied socio-cognitive theories, especially
Participatory Sensemaking (PSM). PSM emphasizes the emergence of new understanding and sensemaking
through interaction, something individual cognition cannot achieve alone. Similarly,
Observable Creative Sensemaking (OCSM) provides measurable, observable parameters—participation, newness, and appropriateness—
that can guide AI in responding to the nuances of social interactions.
Let us look at a speculative case study of text-to-image AI like Midjourney that can utilize social cognition via OCSM
to enhance functionality, divided into three phases: First, in Prompt Understanding, Midjourney applies
OCSM to assess ‘Newness’ and ‘Appropriateness’ in user prompts to grasp creative goals.
Next, it analyzes these aspects during Adaptive Image Generation and converses with users to tailor
outputs to their changing creative visions. Finally, the Interactive Feedback Loop continuously updates
its comprehension based on user feedback, offering diverse image options. This iterative, communicative
process fosters better sensemaking and enriches the co-creative experience.
Please refer to our paper for more details and a case study of our ongoing project, LuminAI. Thank you for listening.